             10 REASONS
                why you should
                 choose latex
10 REASONS                       01
              WHAT DREAMS
              ARE MADE OF




A good sleep is vital for overall health and      Latex mattresses stand out as a top choice
wellbeing, playing a critical role in physical,   for supporting this need. Known for their
mental and emotional functioning. To enjoy        sustainability, unparalleled support, and
a revitalizing sleep, it’s critical people can    exceptional durability, latex ensures that
change their position unhindered when             movement during sleep is effortless.
sleeping. Contrary to what many people            Novaya’s products harness the power of
think, sleep is not passive: body and mind        natural latex, offering everything from
remain fairly active. A healthy sleeper           100% latex to hybrid blends. Here are ten
should therefore be able to move freely           reasons why you should choose latex.
during his sleep. The less muscle labour
needed for that, the better the quality of
sleep and the fitter the sleeper will feel in
the morning.



10 REASONS                                                                                03
01 / PROGRESSIVE COMFORT
     Latex mattresses offer a unique combination of
     softness and support. The superior elasticity of the
     material ensures that our products conform perfectly
     to the natural curves of your body, providing excellent
     spinal alignment and relieving pressure points around
     the shoulders, hips and back. It’s natural resilience
     offers resistance to the sleeper’s weight and adapts
     instantly to any movement. Latex is truly the best
     option for ultimate comfort.




02 / BREATHABILITY
     Our latex has an open-cell structure made up of
     millions of tiny interconnected microscopic air bubbles.
     More than ensuring a very flexible mattress, this also
     promotes constant air circulation. Natural movement
     during sleeping helps to ventilate the mattress,
     allowing optimal airflow and temperature regulation
     throughout the night. Latex does not retain heat,
     making it perfect for hot sleepers.




03 / HYPOALLERGENIC
     Latex is naturally resistant to dust mites, mould and
                                                                         04 / UNDISTURBED REST
     mildew, which are known to be common allergy
     triggers. The unique open-cell structure of latex foam
     promotes optimal airflow, keeping a mattress fresh
                                                                                      Latex is an elastic material that excels at isolating
     and dry by preventing moisture build-up. In addition,
                                                                                      motion. It reduces disturbance caused by your
     the dense structure of latex makes it difficult for dust
                                                                                      partner‘s movements, ensuring an uninterrupted
     mites to penetrate or survive — as proven by the
                                                                                      night‘s sleep.
     Morton Thiokol Research and Development Institute
     (Report No. 87-304) and Centexbel (Report No. 8276
     ISO 10993-5).

     For those with latex sensitivities, there‘s no need to
     worry. Our latex undergoes a special process during
     production that eliminates most allergy-causing
     proteins responsible for allergic reactions.

04                                                              NOVAYA   10 REASONS                                                           05
05 / UNMATCHED DURABILITY
     Latex mattresses are renowned for their
     exceptional durability, as they maintain their shape
     and comfort for years. Tests carried out by the
     LGA Möbelprüfinstitut show that latex loses only a
     minimal amount of its original height and firmness,
     and has a high resistance to sagging. Investing in
     latex means investing in a reliable solution for your
     sleep, for years to come.




06 / NATURAL RAW MATERIAL
     Latex is derived from the sap of the tropical rubber
     tree (hevea brasiliensis), making it a natural and
     renewable resource. Natural latex is extracted
     through a sustainable process called tapping.
     Skilled workers carefully make incisions in the bark
     of the rubber tree to preserve the overall health of
     the tree. After tapping, the tree has time to re-bark
     and heal before tapping
     it again.




07 / MINIMAL USE OF CHEMICALS
     The production of natural latex foam involves
     fewer chemicals compared to the manufacturing
     processes of synthetic foams. Natural latex is
     typically produced with organic and eco-friendly
     materials and a minimal use of additives, which
     reduces chemical emissions and supports a
     healthier indoor environment. For our efforts we
     obtained the OEKO-TEX® and eco-INSTITUT
     certifications.




06                                                           NOVAYA   10 REASONS   07
08 / PREMIUM QUALITY                                                           09 / A SUSTAINABLE CHOICE
             Novaya latex is an excellent product that elevates any                         There are several reasons why our latex products are
             sleep experience. And we have proven it. The LGA label                         a sustainable choice. Firstly, rubber trees are known
             we obtained shows that the latex passes strict quality                         to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere,
             checks. Our products are also thoroughly inspected                             combating global warming. We also reuse all our
             during every step of the manufacturing process,                                post-industrial waste material, and we recycle
             guaranteeing a high-quality product.                                           around 98% of our water. The remaining percentage
                                                                                            evaporates and cannot be recovered. Some of our
                                                                                            products have been awarded the Nordic Swan
                                                                                            Ecolabel, which focuses on climate, a toxin-free
                                                                                            circular economy, biodiversity and health.

Our certifications:



                                                                               10 / DIFFERENTIATION AND
                                 
                                                                               MARKET DEMAND
                                                                                            Latex sets itself apart from the competition,
                                                                                            allowing manufacturers to create a unique selling
                                                                                            proposition. As consumers become increasingly
                                                                                            aware of the benefits of latex, there is a growing
                                                                                            demand for bedding products that incorporate this
                                                                                            natural material. By offering latex-based options,
                                                                                            manufacturers can differentiate themselves in the
                                                                                            market and attract a niche customer base.




08                                                                    NOVAYA   10 REASONS                                                           09
Novaya Belgium nv        +32 51 40 14 31
Grote Molstenstraat 21   info@novaya-comfort.com
8710 Wielsbeke           novaya-comfort.com
Your
comfort
in mind.




      NOVAYA-COMFORT.COM
                           © 2025 Novaya Belgium nv


012                                       NOVAYA
